---
title: 'devlog #3'
author: marco.lizza
layout: post
permalink: "/devlog-3/"
comments: true
published: false
categories: 
  - devlog
tags: 
  - indiedev
  - gamedev
  - game-design
---

I've been an avid gamer since when I was a little kid (around 8 years old, 1983 circa). For almost ten years I played and digest tons of games, indissolubily binding great memories to them. I've also always been intrigued by programming, but I was only in 1992 that I really started and devoted most of my computer-time (there was also music-time, as I'm a passionate albeit amateur guitar/bass/whatever player) to play with assemblers, compilers, registers and memory locations. In the following year I spent my time with fewer games (notable ones were Doom, Half-Life and Diablo) and more "tools".

Around the new millenium I 




Let's talk about the game itself.

It has always been my idea to create a game I would like to play. Not because I can't find games that I like (quite the contrary), but because I'm the type of geek that want to enjoy his creations. At the same time, I don't feel I'm going to *fill* a gap in the gaming world. I'm not aiming in developing a ground-breaking masterpiece (quite a difficult task, nowadays), but at the very least somewhat original.

I still don't have a clear a precise idea on how the resulting game will be. And I'm perfectly with this. I know this is not going to sound as the best way to proceed to maby, but I want to have fun in developing the game. For that reason, at least in the first half of the project it will be very *fluid*.

Most likely **it will be an exploration RPG**, probably inspired to *Zelda* and *Final Fantasy*or older games such as *Ultima*, *Windwalker* and *Times of Lore*. To some degree I find the latter to fit the project expectations best (personally preferring their minimalistic style), but I will implement a more fluid and sophisticated movement. Tiled world representation is going to be used, possibly hexagonal or octagonal cells. The avatar will probably not move freely, but with a targeted movement with the pointer used to highlight the destination cell (and the game possibly find the movement path with or without pathfinding).

> Bit a trivia. It worth notice that *Zelda* influenced *Times of Lore* which, in turn, influenced the latest *Ultima* episodes. Back in these days arcades, consoles and home-computer were very separate a distinct "worlds", so *influences* original game were more common than direct portings. Most of the times console games were not ported to home-computers (mainly due to license reasons), sometime the other ways around would happen. Arcade games were using much more powerful hardwares and conversion were more like *adaptations* that most of the time were lacking crucial parts (this was due to the way conversion were done, with few o no details on the game mechanics and developers needed to discover them by playing and examining the game to nausea).

The **combat-system** will try not to be similar to the one popularized by the  *Final Fantasy* franchise (nor the *Active Time Battle* system), as I always found it to be boring. It will be *turn-based* with a restricted arena where the battle will be conducted. Player and foes will have the chance to exploit the environment by moving/hiding. Perhaps in the league of *Fallout* (the original one).

There will be a **background story**, with the player uncovering as the game evolves. Most likely it won't be conveyed by means of convoluted dialogues and long documents. Clues will be scattered around the world, in form of secondary elements (drawings, ruins, artifacts...), and they will trigger story related details as the player interacts with them. Also the background itself will visually *tell* the story. In fact, at the beginning the player will start *in media res* without any knowledge of the plot (maybe the avatar will reflect the user not knowing anything by means of a form of amnesia).

As for the **main theme**, it is going to be *sci-fi* related (I've been love science fiction since I was a child). Perhaps I will sprinkle it with minor reference to fantasy/new-wave regarding the so-called *Gaia Hypotesis* (in the league of Miyazaki's *Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind* and *Future Boy Conan*, which I love very much). Space exploration will present and the player will exploit very advanced (albeit non-existent) technology.

Speaking about **design**, the colors and sound will describe the game evolution as much as possible. At the very beginning the world will be in blacj-and-white, with colors being added during the game progression. Colors will also be used to convey the location/moment
* I would rainbows to be part of the game, but I need to find a proper way to exploit them (perhaps in some form of easter egg);
* The screen will start in black-and-white, with colors added as the game advance (colors will be used to highlight the location "sense")
* there will be music (the main plot device is the search for the "voice of Gaia");
* The main plot device is the ;
* there will be sub-games designed around being small *clones* of famous games (Joust, Pac-Man, Bubble Bobble, etc..)
* Colors and sounds will be used as weapons

The moment you have a "great" idea is magic. Almost breathtaking. Something just *clicks* in your mind and ideas starts to pop-up one after the other.

*( See you next time! )*

---

*<sup><a name="note_copperlist">1</a></sup> Thanks to Amiga memory-mapped I/O, the Copper is used to achieve a lot of interesting and clever effects. One typically exploit it to surpass the platform conventional limits (e.g. to increase the maximum amount of colors and sprites on screen). Coincidentally, also on the C64 a similar result can be achieved, albeit through a combination of busy-loop vertical synchronization and memory poking (which is what a copper-list does, in the end).*
