---
title: 'devlog #2'
author: marco.lizza
layout: post
permalink: "/devlog-2/"
comments: true
published: false
categories: 
  - devlog
tags: 
  - indiedev
  - gamedev
  - shaders
  - copper
  - visual-effects
---
Shaders are everywhere and for a reason. With a handful of instructions one can easily implement some nice visual effects without heavily burdening the CPU.

It seems that 2D water shaders are among the most popular ones. Almost everybody seems to be interested in developing and/or using them in their games.

Me included, or at least that's what I thought at the beginning. In fact, originally in this entry I wanted to present in greater detail an *awesome* fragment-shader, implementing a cute bi-dimensional reflection effect.

Personally, I've been fascinated by *shaders* since the mid nineties when I installed my first GPU-boosted card on my Pentium computer. I liked them from the beginning because, in my opinion, they carry along with them the marvel and the charm of the old-school effects we were used to marvel upon during the Commodore days (and I miss them sooo much!). The concept itself of shader is intimately close to the *copper-list*: a sequence of instructions executed in parallel from the CPU by a dedicate chip.

Starting from this premise, I decided to change my mind a bit. I won't be using fragment-shaders just  to properly and nicely edulcorate the visual appeal of the game (of course I will use them for such purpose). Most of all, I'll try and exploit them to simulate the kind of effects that the Copper did.

For example, one very nice usage of a fragment shader is to render a gradient sky... or a 


*( See you next time! )*

---

*<sup><a name="love2d_note">1</a></sup> Although I think that it would definitely benefit from switching from SDL to SFML. Also, updating Lua to 5.3 is something I would consider, even if Luajit is not available for it.*

*<sup><a name="in_the_end">2</a></sup> That means I could end up writing my own engine for the game if it’s worth the effort.*

*<sup><a name="other_engines">3</a></sup> Other valid alternatives I found were [Xenko](http://xenko.com/), [Defold](http://www.defold.com/), and [Atomic Game Engine](https://www.atomicgameengine.com/).*
