---
title: 'devlog #1'
author: marco.lizza
layout: post
permalink: "/devlog-1/"
comments: true
published: true
categories: 
  - devlog
tags: 
  - projects
  - indiedev
  - gamedev
---
Time for a new *devlog* entry. As I expected, I'm late and my proposal to write an-entry-a-week has failed from the very beginning... but with a ten-days-later entry I'm close enough. Somewhat.

During the [#1GAM](http://onegameamonth.com) months I used [LOVE2D](https://love2d.org/), and I was very much pleased with it<sup>[1](#love2d_note)</sup>. Also, [Lua](https://lua.org) is a powerful and nice scripting language that I really like to use.

However, I wasn't very at ease in developing the whole game with a scripting language. In fact, **LOVE2D** is more a *framework* rather than a *game-engine*. It seems just plain wrong to me writing some critical parts (e.g. collision detection, path-finding, scene switching to mention some of them) in plain script. It's not something that benefits from rapid script tweaking, but something that need to be fast and affordable. I deem it better developed in C++ and exposed to the script-side of the engine with a suitable API to interact with.

For a while I considered starting and developing yet another custom engine of mine, but I knew how it would have ended. Even by using a ready-to-integrate state-of-the-art multimedia framework ([SMFL](https://sfml.org)) and a rock-solid scripting language ([Lua](https://lua.org)), the time spent in working with the engine will rapildy outgrow the time spent in working on the actual game itself.

Stripping the engine to it's bare minimum with the strictly necessary complexity to handle the game requirements, almost reducing it to a custom game-engine tangled and tailored with the actual game itself (much like games in the the eighties and ealry nineties were done), is an option.

But how would I handle the porting to other platforms? I'm mainly a Windows user, but I'd like my game to be ported to other platforms. While I could afford to port the engine to Linux, MacOS is out of the league (I don't own a personal development Apple computer and I don't intend to explore more the Hackintosh side of the computing world).

I really do like coding game engine. Probably in a couple of months I would have a working prototypal engine. But my primary aim is to develop and (most importantly) *complete* a game in the scarce time I can carve.

While not being a fan of third-party engine (and libraries), preferring to write and exploit mine as much as possible for a number of factors, I began to consider to use one of them. Something with a reasonable learning curve, and that might come handy as a rapid prototyping tool when required<sup>[2](#in_the_end)</sup>.

[Unity](http://unity.org) and [UnrealEngine]() were excluded a-priori, since they appeared too be just enormous and over-powered for my needs, and I feared that I needed to spend way too much time in learning on how to use them rather than working on the game itself. I've checked [Yoyo Games' Game Maker](https://) for a while, and initially I liked it. After some experimentations, however, I found that its workspace management and UI just doen't cut the mustard, being too dispersive and unintuitive (and also the scripting language is way too crude for my habits).

So, after quite a long research<sup>[2](#other_engines)</sup>, I found [Godot](https://godotengine.org). It's still not very famous, but it's quite promising. It's very light as a tool, the UI is well structured, it features a Python-like script language (with C# support in the making), it can be extended with C++ developed modules, it supports both 2D and 3D, can export projects to all the major platforms... and it's completely open. On the bad side, the documentation is a bit lacky... but it is very actively developed and it's has a fast growing community of users and supporters.

For the moment, no commercial games have been developed with Godot, but that's going definitely to change.

*( We'll be back after a short break )*

---

*<sup><a name="love2d_note">1</a></sup> Although I think that it would definitely benefit from switching from SDL to SFML. Also, updating Lua to 5.3 is something I would consider, even if Luajit is not available for it.*

*<sup><a name="in_the_end">2</a></sup> Still, I surely*

*<sup><a name="other_engines">3</a></sup> Other valid alternatives I found were [Xenko](), [Defold](), and [AtomicGameStudio]()... I really suggest you to check them out )*
