---
title: 'devlog #4'
author: marco.lizza
layout: post
permalink: "/devlog-4/"
comments: true
published: false
categories: 
  - devlog
tags: 
  - indiedev
  - gamedev
  - game-design
---
I was very idle during this period... nevertheless, ideas keep on flowing and I've been refining the (general) game mechanics.

The idea is to alternate two very different kind of games. A rouge-like view (i.e. a top-down or bird-eye orthographic projection) during the world exploration in order to enable faster movements, alternated with a platformer side-view when greater detail and fine interaction is required. The latter doesn't only refer to the bosses fights (whose exact mechanic hasn't already been decided in detail) but also during specific world/NPC interaction (e.g. caves and buildings exploration).

This seems like an intriguing idea to me. It's drawback being that, in fact, I'll be somewhat developing two games in one. However, since they are separated enough to be prototyped, developed and tested separately only to be *glued* back when required.

In the meanwhile, [Godot](https://godotengine.org/) approaches it's long awaited *3.0* release. I'm really curious to start and work with it. However, I'm still debated whether I should stay with the initial idea and use a full-fledged engine rather than a framework. Starting from scratch (with C++ and SFML) won't happen this time... but I still fear I'll be spending a lot of time dealing with the engine itself rather than developing the game itself. Perhaps the best idea is to start prototyping the game with *Godot* and see what happens.