---
title: 'devlog #5'
author: marco.lizza
layout: post
permalink: "/devlog-5/"
comments: true
categories: 
  - devlog
tags: 
  - indiedev
  - gamedev
  - game-design
published: true
---
I've come to the conclusion that I simply can't stand in using a tool hiding what's happening under the hood (despite being light ad unobtrusive such as [Godot](https://godotengine.org/)) without having to possibility to bend what I don't like to my own purposes. Also, I don't like the feeling I'm writing code for a scripting language I probably won't reuse at all, being a engine-tailored DSL.

So, I've been tinkering with [Corona SDK](https://coronalabs.com/) which appears quite interesting to me and it uses *Lua* which I'm comfortable with. Also, the framework is very well documented and supported. However, I'm still debated in going back and use [Love2D](https://love2d.org/) that happens to have a simpler (i.e. less abstracted) API... and I like using the basic bricks just how I like.

> To be honest, I'm courious in trying a different framework. That's the main reason I'm switching from *Love2D* (whose, in my opinion, juvenile community feels me a bit unconfrortable).

I'm not a professionally skilled pixel-artist so I though of methods to skip some corners and reach a decent and acceptable productivity level. Eventually the choice fell into using *rotoscope*, whose artistically distinctive style I like very much (also, it's the grounding technique in some of the games that I love the most... such as *Karateka*, *Prince of Persia*, and *Flashback*). As an further simplification, I pla to draw actors silhouette-like (with very few colors).

Speaking of colors, I've spent quite a while in deciding how to handle this subject. I wanted to adopt a palette with a limited amount of colors, and there a quite a lot of *standard* ones. Among the many, *PICO8* has what I feel is the most vibrant and distinctive (reminds me of the Armstrad CPC palette, which I liked very much in the Eighties). Paired with the use of silhouettes it should give good results.

> Please note that won't mean I'm not going to use shades of that base colors, especially in special effects and fragment shaders.

In the meanwhile, I'm fiddling with a minor project that has always been a dream of mine to implement. That is a [Pole Position](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pole_Position_(video_game)) inspired racing game. A very simple one, in the league of the original Atari game. This will be most likely the subject of the next devlog entry. :)
